# Venus

**Venus** is the second planet from the [Sun](/wiki/Sun "Sun"), which orbits around the Sun every
224 Earth days. It has the longest rotational period (243 days) of any planet in the
[Solar System](/wiki/Solar_System "Solar System"), and rotates in the opposite direction to most
other planets. It does not have any natural satellites. The planet is named after the Roman goddess
Venus, the goddess of love and beauty. After the [Moon](/wiki/Moon "Moon"), it is the brightest
object in the night sky, with an apparent magnitude of -4.6, which is bright enough to cast shadows
at night. It is also, albeit rarely, visible to the naked eye in broad daylight.

Venus is a [terrestrial planet](/wiki/Terrestrial_planet "Terrestrial planet"), and is sometimes
called Earth's "sister planet", because of similar characteristics such as the size, mass, proximity
to the Sun, and bulk composition. Venus is also the closest planet to [Earth](/wiki/Earth "Earth").
However, Venus is extremely different from Earth in many ways. It has the densest atmosphere of all
of the terrestrial planets, consisted of more then 96.5% of carbon dioxide. The atmospheric pressure
is also 92 times more dense then Earth', or roughly the pressure found 900 m (3,000 feet) underwater
on Earth. Despite not being the closest planet to the Sun, Venus is the hottest planet in the Solar
System, with a mean surface temperature of 735 K (863 °F, 462 °C). Venus is shrouded by an opaque
layer of highly reflective clouds of sulfuric acid, preventing its surface from being seen from
space in visible light. It might have had oceans in the past, but these have been vaporized due to
the runaway greenhouse effect which caused the temperatures to rise. The water has probably
photodissociated, and the free hydrogen has been swept into interplanetary space by the solar wind
because of the lack of a planetary magnetic field. Venus's surface is a dry desertscape interspersed
with slab-like rocks and is periodically resurfaced by volcanism.

## Physical characteristics

[![Venus-vs-Earth](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/8/89/Venus-vs-Earth.jpg/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180310060116)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/8/89/Venus-vs-Earth.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180310060116)

Size comparison between Venus and [Earth](/wiki/Earth "Earth")

Venus is a [terrestrial planet](/wiki/Terrestrial_planet "Terrestrial planet"), and one of the four
in the Solar System. This means that it has a rocky body like Earth. It is similar to Earth in both
size and mass, and is often described as Earth's "sister" or "twin". The diameter of Venus is
12,103.6 km (7,520.8 mi), which is only 638.4 km (396.7 mi) less than Earth's diameter. Its mass is
81.5% of Earth's. Conditions on the Venusian surface differ radically from those on Earth, because
its dense atmosphere is 96.5% carbon dioxide, with most of the remaining 3.5 being nitrogen.

### Geography

[![Venera](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/d/df/Venera.jpg/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180310060518)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/d/df/Venera.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180310060518)

The surface of Venus, taken from the Soviet Venera probes in 1981

The Venusian surface was a subject of speculation until some of it was revealed by planetary science
in the 20th century. Venera landers in 1975 and 1982 returned images of a surface covered in
sediment and relatively angular rocks. The surface was mapped in detail by Magellan in 1990-91. The
ground shows evidence of extensive volcanism, and the sulfur in the atmosphere may indicate that
there have been some recent eruptions.

Around 80% of the Venusian surface is covered by smooth, volcanic plains, consisting of 70% plains
with wrinkle ridges and 10% smooth or lobate plains. Two highland "continents" make up the rest of
its surface area, one lying in the planet's northern hemisphere and the other just south of the
equator. The northern continent is called Ishtar Terra after Ishtar, the Babylonian goddess of love,
and is about the size of Australia. Maxwell Montes, the highest mountain on Venus, lies on Ishtar
Terra. Its peak is 11 km (7 mi) above the Venusian average surface elevation. The southern continent
is called Aphrodite Terra, after the Greek goddess of love, and is the larger of the two highland
regions at roughly the size of South America. A network of fractures and faults covers much of this
area.

The absence of evidence of lava flow accompanying any of the visible calderas remains an enigma. The
planet has few impact craters, demonstrating that the surface is relatively young, at approximately
300-600 million years old. Venus has some unique surface features in addition to the impact craters,
mountains, and valleys commonly found on rocky planets. Among these are flat--topped volcanic
features called "farra", with an appearance somewhat similar to that of pancakes and range in size
from 20 to 50 km (12 to 31 mi) across, and from 100 to 1,000 m (330 to 3,280 ft) high; radial,
star-like fracture systems called "novae"; features with both radial and concentric fractures
resembling spider webs, known as "arachnoids"; and "coronae", circular rings of fractures sometimes
surrounded by a depression. These features are volcanic in origin.

Most Venusian surface features are named after historical and mythological women. Exceptions are
Maxwell Montes, which is named after James Clerk Maxwell, and highland regions Alpha Regio, Beta
Regio, and Ovda Regio. The latter three names were picked before the current system was adopted by
the International Astronomical Union, the body which oversees planetary nomenclature.

The longitudes of physical features on Venus are expressed relative to its prime meridian. The
original prime meridian passed through the radar-bright spot at the centre of the oval feature Eve,
located south of Alpha Regio. After the Venera missions were completed, the prime meridian was
redefined to pass through the central peak in the crater Ariadne.

### Surface geology

Much of the Venusian surface appears to have been shaped by volcanic activity. Venus has several
times as many volcanoes as Earth, and it has 167 large volcanoes that are over 100 km (62 mi)
across. The only volcanic complex of this size is the Big Island of Hawaii. This is not because
Venus is more volcanically active on Earth, but because its crust is older. Earth's oceanic crust is
continually recycled by subduction at the boundaries of tectonic plates, and has an average age of
100 million years, whereas the surface of Venus is estimated to be around 300-600 million years old.

Several lines of evidence point to ongoing volcanic activity on Venus. During the Soviet Venera
program, the Venera 9 orbiter obtained spectroscopic evidence of lightning on Venus, and the Venera
12 descent probe obtained additional evidence of lightning and thunder. The European Space Agency's
_Venus Express_ in 2007 detected whistler waves, further confirming the occurrence of lightning on
Venus. One possibility is that ash from a volcanic eruption was generating the lightning. Another
piece of evidence comes from measurements of sulfur dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere, which
dropped by a factor of 10 between 1978 and 1986, jumped in 2006, and then declined 10-fold again.
This may mean that levels had been boosted several times by large volcanic eruptions.

In 2008 and 2009, the first direct evidence for ongoing volcanism was observed by _Venus Express_,
in the form of four transient localized infrared hot spots within the rift zone Ganis Chasma, near
the shield volcano Maat Mons. Three of the spots were observed in more than one successful orbit.
Three of the spots were observed in more than one successive orbit. These spots are thought to
present lava freshly released by volcanic eruptions. The actual temperatures are not known, because
the size of the hot spots could not be measured, but they are likely to have been around the range
of 800–1,100 K (527–827 °C; 980–1,520 °F), relative to a normal temperature of 740 K (467 °C; 872
°F).

[![Venus-Impact-Craters](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/2/2a/Venus-Impact-Craters.png/revision/latest?cb=20180312045842)
[![Venus-Impact-Craters](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/2/2a/Venus-Impact-Craters.png/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312045842)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/2/2a/Venus-Impact-Craters.png/revision/latest?cb=20180312045842)

Impact craters on the surface of Venus. (Image is false-colored and reconstructed from radar data)

Almost a thousand impact craters on Venus are evenly distributed across its surface. On other
cratered bodies, such as Earth and the Moon, craters show a range of states of degradation. On the
Moon, degradation is caused by subsequent impacts, whereas on Earth it is caused by wind and rain
erosion. On Venus, about 85% of the craters are in pristine condition. The number of craters,
together with their well-preserved condition, indicates the planet underwent a global resurfacing
event around 300-600 million years ago, followed by a decay in volcanism. Whereas Earth's crust is
in continuous motion, Venus is thought to be unable to sustain such a process. Without plate
tectonics to dissipate heat from its mantle, Venus instead undergoes a cyclical process in which
mantle temperatures rise until they reach a critical level that weakens the crust. Then, over a
period of around 100 million years, subduction occurs on an enormous scale, completely recycling the
crust.

Venusian craters range from 3 to 280 km (2 to 174 mi) in diameter. No crates are smaller than 3 km,
because of the effects of the dense atmosphere on incoming objects. Objects with less than a certain
kinetic energy are slowed down so much by the atmosphere that they do not create an impact crater.
Incoming projectiles less than 50 m (160 ft) in diameter will fragment and burn up in the atmosphere
before reaching the ground.

### Internal structure

[![Venus structure](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/c/cc/Venus_structure.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312050418)
[![Venus structure](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/c/cc/Venus_structure.jpg/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312050418)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/c/cc/Venus_structure.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312050418)

Internal structure of Venus - the crust (outer layer), the mantle (middle layer), and the core
(yellow inner layer)

Without any seismic data or knowledge of inertia, any direct information about the internal
structure and geochemistry of Venus is very little. The similarity in size and density between Venus
and Earth suggests that they share a similar internal structure: a core, mantle, and crust. Like
that of Earth, the Venusian core is at least partially liquid because the two planets have been
cooling at about the same rate. The slightly smaller size of Venus means pressures are 24% lower in
its deep interior than Earth's. The principal difference between the two planets is the lack of
evidence of plate tectonics on Venus, possibly because its crust is too strong to subduct without
water to make it less viscous. This results in reduced heat loss from the planet, preventing it from
cooling and providing a likely explanation for its lack of an internally generated magnetic field.
Instead, Venus may lose its internal heat in periodic major resurfacing events.

### Atmosphere and Climate

[![VenusGlobe](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/c/c6/VenusGlobe.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312051202)
[![VenusGlobe](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/c/c6/VenusGlobe.jpg/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312051202)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/c/c6/VenusGlobe.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312051202)

Global radar view of Venus (without clouds) from Magellan between 1990 and 1994

Venus has an extremely dense atmosphere, composed of 96.5% carbon dioxide, 3.5% nitrogen, and traces
of other gases, most notably sulfur dioxide. The mass of its atmosphere is 93 times that of Earth's,
whereas the pressure at tits surface is about 92 times that of Earth's-a pressure equivalent to that
at a depth of nearly 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) under Earth's oceans. The density at the surface is 65
kg/m3, 6.5% that of water or 50 times as dense as Earth's atmosphere at 293 K (20 °C; 68 °F) at sea
level. The CO2-rich atmosphere generates the strongest greenhouse effect in the Solar System,
creating surface temperatures of at least 735 K (462 °C; 864 °F). This makes Venus the hottest
planet in the Solar System, even hotter than [Mercury](/wiki/Mercury "Mercury"), which has a minimum
surface temperature of 53 K (−220 °C; −364 °F) and maximum surface temperature of 693 K (420 °C; 788
°F), even though Venus is nearly twice Mercury's distance from the Sun and thus receives only 25% of
Mercury's solar irradiance. The temperature is higher than that use for sterilization. The surface
of Venus is often described as resembling traditional accounts of Hell, and for this reason is
sometimes referred to as "Earth's hellish twin".

Studies have shown that billion of years ago, Venu's atmosphere was much more like Earth's than it
is now, and that there may have been substantial quantities of liquid water on its surface, but
after a period of 600 million to several billion years, a runaway greenhouse effect was caused by
the evaporation of that original water, which generated a critical level of greenhouse gases in its
atmosphere.

Although the surface conditions on Venus are no longer hospitable to any Earthlike life that may
have formed before this event, there is speculation on the possibility that life may exist in the
upper cloud layers of Venus, 50 km (31 mi) up from the surface, where the temperature ranges between
303 and 353 K (30 and 80 °C; 86 and 176 °F) but the environment is acidic.

Thermal inertia and the transfer of heat by winds in the lower atmosphere mean that the temperature
of Venus's surface does not vary significantly between the night and day sides, despite Venus's
extremely slow rotation. Winds at the surface are slow, moving at a few kilometres per hour, but
because of the high density of the atmosphere at the surface, they exert a significant amount of
force against obstructions, and transport dust and small stones across the surface. This alone would
make it difficult for a human to walk through, even if other factors like heat, pressure, and lack
of oxygen were not a problem.

Above the dense CO2 layer are thick clouds consisting mainly of sulfuric acid, which is formed by
sulfur dioxide and water through a chemical reaction resulting in sulfuric acid hydrate.
Additionally, the atmosphere consists of approximately 1% ferric chloride. Other possible
constituents of the cloud particles are ferric sulfate, aluminium chloride and phosphoric anhydride.
Clouds at different levels have different compositions and particle size distributions. These clouds
reflect and scatter about 90% of the sunlight that falls on them back into space, and prevent visual
observations of Venus's surface. The permanent cloud cover means that although Venus is closer than
Earth to the Sun, it receives less sunlight on the ground. Strong 300 km/h (185 mph) winds at the
cloud tops go around Venus about every four to five Earth days. Winds on Venus move at up to 60
times the speed of its rotation, whereas Earth's fastest winds are only 10–20% rotation speed.

The surface of Venus is effectively isothermal; it retains a constant temperature not only between
day and night but between the equator and the poles. Venus's minute axial tilt - less than 3°,
compared to 23° on Earth - also minimizes seasonal temperature variation. The only appreciable
variation in temperature occurs with altitude. The highest point on Venus, Maxwell Montes, is
therefor the coolest point on Venus, with a temperature of around 655 K (380 °C; 715 °F) and an
atmospheric pressure of about 4.5 MPa (45 bar). In 1995, the Magellan spacecraft imaged a highly
reflective substance at the tops of the highest mountain peaks that bore a strong resemblance to
terrestrial snow. This substance, referred to as [venus snow](/wiki/Venus_snow "Venus snow"), likely
formed from a similar process to snow, albeit at a far higher temperature. Too volatile to condense
on the surface, it rose in gaseous form to higher elevations, where it is cooler and could
precipitate. The identity of this substance is not known with certainty, but speculation has ranged
from elemental tellurium to lead sulfide (galena).

The clouds of Venus may be capable of producing lightning. The existence of lightning in the
atmosphere of Venus has been controversial, since the first suspected bursts were detected by the
Soviet Venera probes. In 2006-07, _Venus Express_ clearly detected whistler mode waves, the
signatures of lightning. Their intermittent appearance indicates a pattern associated with weather
activity. According to these measurements, the lightning rate is at least half of that on Earth. In
2007, _Venus Express_ discovered that a huge double atmospheric vortex exists at the south pole.

_Venus Express_ also discovered, in 2011, that an ozone layer exists high in the atmosphere of
Venus. On January 29, 2013, ESA scientists reported that the ionosphere of Venus streams outward in
a matter similar to "the ion tail seen streaming from a comet under similar conditions."

In December 2015, and to a lesser extent in April and May 2016, researchers working on Japan's
**Akatsuki** mission observed bow shapes in the atmosphere of Venus. This was considered direct
evidence of the existence of perhaps the largest stationary gravity waves in the Solar System.

### Magnetic field and core

In 1967, Venera 4 found Venus's magnetic field to be much weaker than that of Earth. This magnetic
field is induced by an interaction between the ionosphere and the solar wind, rather than by
internal dynamo as in the Earth's core. Venus's small induced magnetosphere provides negligible
protection to the atmosphere against cosmic radiation.

The lack of an intrinsic magnetic field at Venus was surprising, given that it is similar to Earth
in size, and was expected also to contain a dynamo at its core. A dynamo requires three things: a
conducting liquid, rotation, and convection. The core is thought to be electrically conductive, and
although its rotation is often thought to be too slow, simulations show it is adequate to produce a
dynamo. This implies that the dynamo is missing because of a lack of convection in Venus's core. On
Earth, convection occurs in the liquid outer layer of the core because the bottom of the liquid
layer is much hotter than the top. On Venus, a global resurfacing event may have shut down plate
tectonics and led to a reduced heat flux through the crust. This caused the mantle temperature to
increase, thereby reducing the heat flux out of the core. As a result, no internal geodynamo is
available to drive a magnetic field. Instead, the heat from the core is being used to reheat the
crust.

One possibility is that Venus has no solid inner core, or that its core is not cooling, so that the
entire liquid part of the core is at approximately the same temperature. Another possibility is that
its core has already completely solidified. The state of the core is highly dependent on the
concentration of sulfur, which is unknown at present.

The weak magnetosphere around Venus means that the solar wind is interacting directly with its outer
atmosphere. Here, ions of hydrogen and oxygen are being created by the dissociation of neutral
molecules from ultraviolet radiation. The solar wind then supplies energy that gives some of these
ions sufficient velocity to escape Venus's gravity field. This erosion process results in a steady
loss of low-mass hydrogen, helium, and oxygen ions, whereas higher-mass molecules, such as carbon
dioxide, are more likely to be retained. Atmospheric erosion by the solar wind probably led to the
loss of most of Venus's water during the first billion years after it formed. The erosion has
increased the ratio of higher-mass deuterium to lower-mass hydrogen in the atmosphere 100 times
compared to the rest of the solar system.

## Orbit and rotation

[![Venus-Orbit](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/9/9c/Venus-Orbit.gif/revision/latest?cb=20180312172226)
[![Venus-Orbit](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/9/9c/Venus-Orbit.gif/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312172226)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/9/9c/Venus-Orbit.gif/revision/latest?cb=20180312172226)

Venus orbits the Sun at an average distance of about 0.72 AU (108 million km; 67 million mi) and
completes an orbit every 224.7 days. Although all planetary orbits are elliptical, Venus's orbit is
the closest to circular, with an eccentricity of less than 0.01. When Venus lies between Earth and
the Sun in inferior conjunction, it makes the closest approach to Earth of any planet at an average
distance of 41 million km (25 million mi). The planet reaches inferior conjunction every 584 days,
on average. Because of the decreasing eccentricity of Earth's orbit, the minimum distances will
become greater over tens of thousands of years. From the year 1 to 5383, there are 526 approaches
less than 40 million km; then there are none for around 60,158 years.

All the planets in the Solar System orbit the Sun in a counterclockwise direction as viewed from
above Earth's north pole. Most planets also rotate on the axes in an anti-clockwise direction, but
Venus rotates clockwise in retrograde rotation once every 243 Earth days - the slowest rotation of
any planet. Because its rotation is so slow, Venus is very close to spherical. This means that a
Venusian sidereal day is actually longer than a Venusian year (243 vs 224.7 Earth days). Venus's
equator rotates at 6.52 km/h (4.05 mph), whereas Earth's rotates at 1,669.8 km/h (1,037.6 mph).
Venus's rotation has been slowed down in the 16 years between the _Magellan_ spacecraft and _Venus
Express_ visits; each Venusian sidereal day has increased by 6.5 minutes in that time span. Because
of the retrograde rotation, the length of a solar day on Venus is significantly shorter than the
sidereal day, at 116.75 Earth days (making the Venusian solar day shorter than Mercury's at 176
Earth days). One Venusian year is about 1.92 Venusian solar days. To an observer on the surface of
Venus, the Sun would rise in the west and set in the east, although Venus's opaque clouds prevent
observing the Sun from the planet's surface.

Venus may have formed from the solar nebula with a different rotation period and obliquity, reaching
its current state because of chaotic spin changes caused by planetary perturbations and tidal
effects on its dense atmosphere, a change that would have occurred over the course of billions of
years. The rotation period of Venus may represent an equilibrium state between tidal locking to the
Sun's gravitation, which tends to slow rotation, and an atmospheric tide created by solar heating of
the thick Venusian atmosphere. The 584-day average interval between successive close approaches to
Earth is almost exactly equal to 5 Venusian solar days, but the hypothesis of a spin–orbit resonance
with Earth has been discounted.

Venus does not have any natural satellites. It has several trojan asteroids: the
[quasi-satellite](/wiki/Quasi-satellite "Quasi-satellite") 2002 VE68, and two other temporary
trojans, 2001 CK32 and 2012 XE133. In the 17th century, Giovanni Cassini reported a moon orbiting
Venus, which was named Neith, and numerous sightings were reported over the following 200 years, but
most were determined to be stars in the vicinity. Alex Alemi's and David Stevenson's 2006 study of
models of the early Solar System at the California Institute of Technology shows Venus likely had at
least one moon, created by a huge impact event billions of years ago. About 10 million years later,
according to the study, another impact reversed the planet's spin direction and caused the Venusian
moon to gradually spiral inward until it collided with Venus. If later impacts created moons, they
would have been removed in the same way. An alternative explanation for the lack of satellites is
the effect of strong solar tides, which can destabilize large satellites orbiting the inner
terrestrial planets.

## Observation

[![Venus-over-ocean](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/8/85/Venus-over-ocean.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312173434)
[![Venus-over-ocean](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/8/85/Venus-over-ocean.jpg/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312173434)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/8/85/Venus-over-ocean.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312173434)

Venus is always brighter than all planets or stars, other than the Sun, as seen from Earth. The
second brightest object in this image is [Jupiter](/wiki/Jupiter "Jupiter").

To the naked eye, Venus appears as a white point of light brighter than any planet or star (other
than the Sun). Its brightest apparent magnitude, -4.9, occurs during the crescent phase, only 36
days before or after inferior conjunction. Venus was brightest on April 30, 2017, then grew dimmer
for nearly a year. Venus fades to about magnitude −3 when it is backlit by the Sun. The planet is
bright enough to be seen in a clear midday sky, and is more easily visible when the Sun is low on
the horizon or setting. As an inferior planet, it always lies within about 47° of the Sun.

Venus "overtakes" Earth every 584 days as it orbits the Sun. As it does so, it changes from the
"Evening Star", visible after sunset, to the "Morning Star", visible before sunrise. Although
[Mercury](/wiki/Mercury "Mercury"), the other inferior planet, reaches a maximum elongation of only
28° and is often difficult to discern in twilight, Venus is hard to miss when it is at its
brightest. Its greater maximum elongation means it is visible in dark skies long after sunset. As
the brightest point-like object in the sky, Venus is a commonly misreported "unidentified flying
object".

### Phases

[![Phases Venus](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/1/11/Phases_Venus.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312173744)
[![Phases Venus](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/1/11/Phases_Venus.jpg/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312173744)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/1/11/Phases_Venus.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312173744)

The phases of Venus and evolution of its apparent diameter

As it orbits the Sun, Venus displays phases like those of the Moon in a telescopic view. The planet
appears as a small and "full" disc when it is on the opposite side of the Sun (at superior
conjunction). Venus shows a larger disc and "quarter phase" at its maximum elongations from the Sun,
and appears its brightest in the night sky. The planet presents a much larger thin "crescent" in
telescopic views as it passes along the near side between Earth and the Sun. Venus displays its
largest size and "new phase" when it is between Earth and the Sun (at inferior conjunction). Its
atmosphere is visible through telescopes by the halo of sunlight refracted around it.

### Transits

The Venusian orbit is slightly inclined relative to Earth's orbit; thus, when the planet passes
between Earth and the Sun, it usually does not cross the face of the Sun. Transits of Venus occur
when the planet's inferior conjunction coincides with its presence in the plane of Earth's orbit.
Transits of Venus occur in cycles of 243 years with the current pattern of transits being pairs of
transits separated by eight years, at intervals of about 105.5 years or 121.5 years - a pattern
first discovered in 1639 by the English astronomer Jeremiah Horrocks.

The latest pair was June 8, 2004 and June 5–6, 2012. The transit could be watched live from many
online outlets or observed locally with the right equipment and conditions.

The preceding pair of transits occurred in December 1874 and December 1882; the following pair will
occur in December 2117 and December 2125. The oldest film known is the 1874 Passage de Venus,
showing the 1874 Venus transit of the sun. Historically, transits of Venus were important, because
they allowed astronomers to determine the size of the astronomical unit, and hence the size of the
Solar System as shown by Horrocks in 1639. Captain Cook's exploration of the east coast of Australia
came after he had sailed to Tahiti in 1768 to observe a transit of Venus.

### Pentagram of Venus

[![Venus-Pentagram](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/6/60/Venus-Pentagram.png/revision/latest?cb=20180312174305)
[![Venus-Pentagram](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/6/60/Venus-Pentagram.png/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312174305)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/6/60/Venus-Pentagram.png/revision/latest?cb=20180312174305)

The pentagram of Venus. Earth is positioned at the center of the diagram, and the curve represents
the direction and distance of Venus as a function of time.

The pentagram of Venus is the path that Venus makes as observed from Earth. Successive inferior
conjunctions of Venus repeat very near 13:8 orbital resonance (Earth orbits 8 times for every 13
orbits of Venus), shifting 144° upon sequential inferior conjunctions. The resonance 131:8 ratio is
approximate. 8/13 is approximately 0.615385 while Venus orbits the Sun is 0.615187 years.

### Daylight apparitions

Naked eye observations of Venus during daylight hours exist in several anecdotes and records.
Astronomer Edmund Halley calculated its maximum naked eye brightness in 1716, when many Londoners
were alarmed by its appearance in the daytime. French emperor Napoleon Bonaparte once witnessed a
daytime apparition of the planet while at a reception in Luxembourg. Another historical daytime
observation of the planet took place during the inauguration of the American president Abraham
Lincoln in Washington, D.C., on 4 March 1865. Although naked eye visibility of Venus's phases is
disputed, records exist of observations of its crescent.

### Ashen light

A long-standing mystery of Venus observations is the so-called ashen light - an apparent weak
illumination of its dark side, seen when the planet is in the crescent phase. The first claimed
observation of ashen light was made in 1643, but the existence of the illumination has never been
reliably confirmed. Observers have speculated it may result from electrical activity in the Venusian
atmosphere, but it could be illusory, resulting from the physiological effect of observing a bright,
crescent-shaped object.

## Studies

### Early studies

Venus was known to ancient civilizations both as the "morning star", and as the "evening star",
names that reflect the early assumption that these were two separate objects. The ancient Sumerians,
who recognized Venus as a single object, believed that it was their goddess Inanna. Inanna's
movements in several of her myths, including _Inanna and Shukaletuda_ and _Inanna's Descent into the
Underworld_, appear to parallel the motion of the planet Venus. The Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa,
believed to have been compiled around the mid-seventeenth century BCE, shows the Babylonians
understood the two were a single object, referred to in the tablet as the "bright queen of the sky",
and could support this view with detailed observations.

The ancient Greeks thought that Venus was two separate stars: Phosphorus and Hesperus. Pliny the
Elder credited the realization that they were a single object to Pythagoras in the sixth century
BCE, while Diogenes Laertius argued that Parmenides was probably responsible. The ancient Chinese
referred to the morning Venus as "the Great White" (Tai-bai 太白) or "the Opener (Starter) of
Brightness" (Qi-ming 啟明), and the evening Venus as "the Excellent West One" (Chang-geng 長庚). The
Romans designated the morning aspect of Venus as Lucifer, literally "Light-Bringer", and the evening
aspect as Vesper, both literal translations of the respective Greek names.

In the second century, in his astronomical treatise Almagest, Ptolemy theorized that both Mercury
and Venus are located between the Sun and the Earth. The 11th century Persian astronomer Avicenna
claimed to have observed the transit of Venus, which later astronomers took as confirmation of
Ptolemy's theory. In the 12th century, the Andalusian astronomer Ibn Bajjah observed "two planets as
black spots on the face of the Sun", which were later identified as the transits of Venus and
Mercury by the Maragha astronomer Qotb al-Din Shirazi in the 13th century.

When the Italian physicist [Galileo Galilei](/wiki/Galileo_Galilei "Galileo Galilei") first observed
the planet in the early 17th century, he found it showed phases like the Moon, varying from crescent
to gibbous to full and vice versa. When Venus is furthest from the Sun in the sky, it shows a
half-lit phase, and when it is closest to the Sun in the sky, it shows as a crescent or full phase.
This could be possible only if Venus orbited the Sun, and this was among the first observations to
clearly contradict the Ptolemaic geocentric model that the Solar System was concentric and centred
on Earth.

The 1639 transit of Venus was accurately predicted by Jeremiah Horrocks and observed by him and his
friend, William Crabtree, at each of their respective homes, on 4 December 1639 (24 November under
the Julian calendar in use at that time).

The atmosphere of Venus was discovered in 1761 by Russian polymath Mikhail Lomonosov. Venus's
atmosphere was observed in 1790 by German astronomer Johann Schröter. Schröter found when the planet
was a thin crescent, the cusps extended through more than 180°. He correctly surmised this was due
to scattering of sunlight in a dense atmosphere. Later, American astronomer Chester Smith Lyman
observed a complete ring around the dark side of the planet when it was at inferior conjunction,
providing further evidence for an atmosphere. The atmosphere complicated efforts to determine a
rotation period for the planet, and observers such as Italian-born astronomer Giovanni Cassini and
Schröter incorrectly estimated periods of about 24 h from the motions of markings on the planet's
apparent surface.

### Ground based research

[![Venus-Telescope](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/3/38/Venus-Telescope.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312175137)
[![Venus-Telescope](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/3/38/Venus-Telescope.jpg/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312175137)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/3/38/Venus-Telescope.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312175137)

Venus observed from a modern telescope

Little more was discovered about Venus until the 20th century. Its almost featureless disc gave no
hint what its surface might be like, and it was only with the development of spectroscopic, radar
and ultraviolet observations that more of its secrets were revealed. The first ultraviolet
observations were carried out in the 1920s, when Frank E. Ross found that ultraviolet photographs
revealed considerable detail that was absent in visible and infrared radiation. He suggested this
was due to a dense, yellow lower atmosphere with high cirrus clouds above it.

Spectroscopic observations in the 1900s gave the first clues about the Venusian rotation. Vesto
Slipher tried to measure the Doppler shift of light from Venus, but found he could not detect any
rotation. He surmised the planet must have a much longer rotation period than had previously been
thought. Later work in the 1950s showed the rotation was retrograde. Radar observations of Venus
were first carried out in the 1960s, and provided the first measurements of the rotation period,
which were close to the modern value.

Radar observations in the 1970s revealed details of the Venusian surface for the first time. Pulses
of radio waves were beamed at the planet using the 300 m (980 ft) radio telescope at Arecibo
Observatory, and the echoes revealed two highly reflective regions, designated the Alpha and Beta
regions. The observations also revealed a bright region attributed to mountains, which was called
Maxwell Montes. These three features are now the only ones on Venus that do not have female names.

### Exploration

[![Mariner 2](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/9/90/Mariner_2.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312175342)
[![Mariner 2](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/9/90/Mariner_2.jpg/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312175342)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/9/90/Mariner_2.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20180312175342)

Artist impression of Mariner 2, launched in 1962.

The first robotic space probe mission to Venus, and the first to any planet, began with the Soviet
Venera program in 1961. The United States' exploration of Venus had its first success with the
Mariner 2 mission on 14 December 1962, becoming the world's first successful interplanetary mission,
passing 34,833 km (21,644 mi) above the surface of Venus, and gathering data on the planet's
atmosphere.

[![Venera9](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIABAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAEALAAAAAABAAEAQAICTAEAOw%3D%3D)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/1/15/Venera9.png/revision/latest?cb=20180312175820)
[![Venera9](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/1/15/Venera9.png/revision/latest/scale-to-width-down/180?cb=20180312175820)](https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/planet-archives/images/1/15/Venera9.png/revision/latest?cb=20180312175820)

180-degree panorama of Venus's surface from the Soviet Venera 9 lander in 1975. Black-and-white
image of barren, black, slate-like rocks against a flat sky. The ground and probe are the focus.
Several lines are missing due to a simultaneous transmission of scientific data.

On 18 October 1967, the Soviet Venera 4 successfully entered the atmosphere and deployed science
experiments. Venera 4 showed the surface temperature was hotter than Mariner 2 had calculated, at
almost 773 K (500 °C; 932 °F) determined that the atmosphere is 95% carbon dioxide (CO2), and
discovered that Venus's atmosphere was considerably denser than Venera 4's designers had
anticipated. The joint Venera 4–Mariner 5 data were analysed by a combined Soviet–American science
team in a series of colloquia over the following year, in an early example of space cooperation.

In 1974, Mariner 10 swung by Venus on its way to Mercury and took ultraviolet photographs of the
clouds, revealing the extraordinarily high wind speeds in the Venusian atmosphere.

In 1975, the Soviet Venera 9 and 10 landers transmitted the first images from the surface of Venus,
which were in black and white. In 1982 the first colour images of the surface were obtained with the
Soviet Venera 13 and 14 landers.

NASA obtained additional data in 1978 with the Pioneer Venus project that consisted of two separate
missions: Pioneer Venus Orbiter and Pioneer Venus Multiprobe. The successful Soviet Venera program
came to a close in October 1983, when Venera 15 and 16 were placed in orbit to conduct detailed
mapping of 25% of Venus's terrain (from the north pole to 30°N latitude)

Several other Venus flybys took place in the 1980s and 1990s that increased the understanding of
Venus, including Vega 1 (1985), Vega 2 (1985), Galileo (1990), Magellan (1994), Cassini–Huygens
(1998), and MESSENGER (2006). Then, Venus Express by the European Space Agency (ESA) entered orbit
around Venus in April 2006. Equipped with seven scientific instruments, Venus Express provided
unprecedented long-term observation of Venus's atmosphere. ESA concluded that mission in
December 2014.

As of 2016, Japan's Akatsuki is in a highly elliptical orbit around Venus since 7 December 2015, and
there are several probing proposals under study by Roscosmos, NASA, and India's ISRO.

In 2016, NASA announced that it was planning a rover, the Automaton Rover for Extreme Environments,
designed to survive for an extended time in Venus's environmental conditions. It would be controlled
by a mechanical computer and driven by wind power.

## Symbol

The symbol of Venus (♀) is the same as that used in biology for the female sex: a circle with a
small cross beneath. The Venus symbol also represents femininity, and in Western alchemy stood for
the metal copper.Polished copper has been used for mirrors from antiquity, and the symbol of Venus
has sometimes been understood to stand for the mirror of the goddess.

## Habitability

The speculation of the existence of life on Venus has decreased significantly since the 1960s, when
spacecraft began studying Venus and it became clear that the conditions on Venus are extreme
compared to those on Earth.

The fact that Venus is located closer to the Sun than Earth, raising temperatures on the surface to
nearly 735 K (462 °C; 863 °F),the atmospheric pressure is ninety times that of Earth, and the
extreme impact of the greenhouse effect, make water-based life as we know it unlikely. A few
scientists have speculated that thermoacidophilic extremophile microorganisms might exist in the
lower-temperature, acidic upper layers of the Venusian atmosphere. The atmospheric pressure and
temperature fifty kilometres above the surface are similar to those of at Earth's surface. This has
led to the proposals to use aerostats (lighter-than-air balloons) for initial exploration and
ultimately for permanent "floating cities" in the Venusian atmosphere. Among the many engineering
challenges are the dangerous amounts of sulfuric acid at these heights.
